---
layout: page_collection
title: Step 12 - Manage Accountability and Control 
permalink: 12_step-12
---
<script>
$(function() {
  $( "#accordion" ).accordion({
    heightStyle: "content",
    collapsible: "true",
    active: "false"
  });
});
</script>

<script src="https://use.fontawesome.com/e20c671b68.js"></script>
---------------------------------------------------------

Management accountability is the expectation that managers are responsible for the quality and timeliness of program performance, increasing productivity, controlling costs and mitigating adverse aspects of agency operations. Managers are also responsible for assuring that programs are managed with integrity and in compliance with applicable law. 

## <span style="color: #0C5C89">**Checklist**</span>

> <i class="fa fa-check-square-o"></i> &nbsp;**Use ICAM-specific evaluation criteria for use by agency independent evaluators to assess ICAM implementations.** The criteria should use the characteristics of the FICAM architecture as a model for controlling ICAM program costs and increase efficiency. The performance architecture defines clear areas for managing and evaluating alignment of programs with the FICAM architecture. In particular, the performance metrics identify quantitative measures for evaluating ICAM program success. 

> Common topics for evaluation criteria include: 

>> * Elimination of manual, paper-based processes for the collection of identity data 

>> * Compliance with acquisition guidance for PIV card products and services as a component of acquisition assessments 

>> * Adoption of standards-based, commercially available products and technologies in ICAM modernization efforts 

>> * Streamlining of provisioning and authentication services through enterprise capabilities 

>> * Coordinated ICAM program management and investment across supporting projects 

> In addition, OMB Circular A-123 includes, as a control, separation of duties for various functions. An enterprise Logical Access Control System (LACS) service can support this required control by detecting the conflict and allowing the corrective action. Additionally, an automated enterprise auditing capability across agency applications offers enhanced visibility to more easily control access to systems and sensitive information. This capability could be used to support evaluating compliance with policy and applicable law.


















